So when the previous video were built in some basic interactivity into our app.
But we know today that it's not very interactive because we can't get any data from the user other than
the fact that they've pressed the button.
So in this video we're going to add a text field and see how we can get the data within that text field
and do something with it when the button is pressed.
All right.
So let's go back over to our lay out.
Get rid of the log for the moment.
And see you in a little.
In fact we'll get rid of that bit over there because we don't need it and we're going to click on text
and bring in a plain text element and I'll just pop it above the button there.
And there we go.
You can see it takes the default Android style so fast I'll make it full width by changing the width
to match constraint and then add in some small margins on the left and the right and I'll just add a
third margin linking it to the button so that it's well laid out and we're going to need to be able
to refer to this UI elements in our code to know what its value is.
So we're going to look at for the first time the id attribute and each element here has an ID.
If we look at the button that ID is just button and the ID of the text field here is added text which
is the name that we use for a text field in Android development.
So just to customize that little bit we're taking the name of the person here.
So I'm going to call this name added text.
If you haven't come across this capitalization before this is known as camel case where the first word
is completely lowercase and then every word after that is capitalized and it's just a nice way to keep
it completely text based no spaces but make it reasonably readable for human viewers.
And just one other thing to show you about added texts before we go and write some code is that we can
add a hint which is very useful.
So if we want to use his name for example we might say your name and that is a hint and then if we get
rid of the text name then that will display that and then run the app correctly and see how that behaves.
We should find that your name appears faintly and then when we tap in the field and start writing some
text it disappears completely.
So you've probably seen that behavior either on apps on Web sites.
It's a very useful way to interact.
So you can see it's clear we're asking for the name but as soon as we start typing the hint goes away.
Brenham.
So we've created an edit text with an ID of name added text and we want to get its value when the button
is pressed and display it in the logs.
So a few new things to learn.
The first is that we need to create an edit text variable to refer to our name added text that we've
just created.
So this variable has a type of added text so it's added text with a capital H and I'll call it name
edit text.
We need to add the added text class of the top then
and it's going to be equal to this particular view or the text field.
And the way that we find that view is we use the method find view by id and then the ID we know is name
edit text but we don't just enter name added text we use our resources dot ID for our set of resources
and then within that we use our particular ID so name added text and then we end with a semicolon.
We're not quite done because this find view by id method will return a view and we want an edit text
which is a particular type of.
So we have to convert the view that is returned by this method into an edit text and we do that by adding
edit text in brackets before they find view.
By id method.
So this will create a variable of type added text with a name of name added text and it will find a
view by its ID.
The ID is invisible says on the set of IDS within our app and name it it text is the actual ID and then
it will convert that into an added text and set the name added text variable equal to that makes sense.
Excellent.
If you are not 100 percent don't worry it will become clearer as you practice it.
OK so then we're going to add a second line to the logs.
And this one is going to have a tag of values because it's going to be a valley.
And the actual thing we want to log is the value of the name.
Edit text say the text within it and we get that using name as a text dot get text.
And then we need an extra function to convert it to a string so that we can display it in the logs.
So this finds the edit text it gets the text within it and then they convert it to a string which is
just a set of characters and displays it in the logs.
All right here we go.
Let's run it and see if it behaves as we want.
OK so first off if I just press the button when it's empty
you'll see we just get it worked because there's no value
in the text.
But if we write up and then press the button you can see we get it worked.
And then Rob great.
So that's how we get the value of a particular field as before.
I want you to try this out and I want the creation of a new app to be second nature for you as well.
So I'd like you to create a simple log in screen so it should ask using text fields for a username and
password and then the button should say log in.
And then when you click the log in button in the logs we want to see the username and password that
the user has entered.
All right that's the challenge.
Good luck.
Go for it.
All right.
Well I'm going to see clays this project and start a new one.
I'll call it loggin demo.
And because we're old pros at this now I can just click next next next and let androids to do its thing.
So we want to get the user name and password from the user so we need to edit texts and then a single
button underneath
to allow the user to log in.
So let's get rid of I'll text you then.
And bring in plain text.
Now we do have some other types of text fields so we could use an email one if we like but I'm going
to stick with plain text as we're going for it use a name rather than password.
So let's set up text.
So we're going from top to bottom use and aim at it text is what we'll call it.
And actually we need to jump to lay out with match constraint and then I'll add the left.
So we've got 16 there that's quite a nice margin from the edge.
So we'll have 16 on the other side as well.
And we will get rid of the name text and I'll just change the hint to
use a name.
Every guy can have a look at the input types.
There isn't a user name option.
So I think I'll leave it as it's just a plain text.
But for the next one we want a password so let's use the password field.
And if you did that yourself then give yourself some bonus points so this will have the effect of not
showing the actual characters when he uses them but just showing little blobs instead.
As before we change the password width to match constraint and then we'll add in
some margins.
So you can see the default ID for this one is added text 2.
I'm going to change that to password at it.
TEXT And we'll have a hint which will just be password
great.
Let's not forget a top margin for these.
So the layout is clear.
And then we'll bring in our button
which I'll send to adding three margins and I'll change the text from button to log in and change the
ID to logon button.
All right.
OK.
So we're all done there apart from the on click method.
I'll come back and do that when I've defined it over here in main activity Java right.
Third time we've done this now so it should be reasonably clear in your mind.
We're creating a public method doesn't return anything.
So it's void and I'll call it loggin this time because that's what we want it to at least appear to
the user that we're doing the method receives a variable of type view which we'll call V which will
be the button that calls it and then lets first off just do a simple log and I'll show you why I do
that in a minute.
So in fact.
And then button pressed.
And I think this is a good thing to do just to make sure that everything is connected up right before
you right sort of any complicated carryed.
Just make sure that your button is linked up to your code like that.
And that if there's a problem it's not because your code doesn't work.
Because your code is so simple it can't possibly not work.
So it's worth just doing a quick check at this point and then will write the code to get the value of
the user name had the password.
So here we go.
All looks good.
Let's just tap the log in button and check the logs.
There we go.
That's looking good.
Yep.
So all is linked up right.
We just need to get the values of the user name and password fields so again hopefully you remember
we create a variable of type edit text that it takes class.
Let's call this name edit text and we're going to get this using find view by id and the ID is resources
ID dot use a name and a text
and we want to convert that to an added text from just a general view.
Same with password.
Added text I would get into the habit of literally as you're typing these things to be talking it through
in the same way I am to say what the actual lines of code are doing.
So we're finding a view by its ID the ID as resources Id use a name at it text and then we're converting
that to an added text.
Excellent name would just add in two lines for the logs.
So this is going to be the user name
we won't use and aim at it text don't get text dot to string that we have to predict to say good.
You can almost get away without typing anything in there.
We'll have the password which is password it text or get text dot to stry.
There we go.
I should do it.
Well press it again.
That little dot by the way means that it's going to run the app without completely re-installing it
which is supposed to be a bit quicker.
I haven't noticed it.
Super quick but there you go.
That's not too bad.
So again if there's no value we don't get anything logged.
But if I put in my username and password is my password and then press log in
there we go.
The button was pressed
ha.
And can you see what mistake I made there.
Hopefully you noticed at the time I thought I'll leave this mistake in.
We all make mistakes.
The important thing is that we figure out there there or we release OK to the world.
I should have been password added text not user name added text.
All right let's try that again Rob.
And password log in.
There we go.
That's better.
All right.
Hopefully you manage to do that without making an awful mistake.
But we're now able to make a more interactive app but that's probably part of you thinking but this
isn't really interactive because the user can't see any of this log content that we've created down
here.
So we really need to display something for the users so that they know that they've logged in or that
we've really registered the button click.
And that's exactly what will they in the next video.